---
layout: post
author: dagingaa
title: The butterfly effects of social media
category: Talk
---
<small><i>Originally posted on <a href="http://telenordigital.com/post/the-butterfly-effects-of-">telenordigital.com</a></i></small>

Some of you may be familiar with the “butterfly effect”. The phrase refers to
the idea that a butterfly’s wings might create tiny changes in the atmosphere
that may ultimately alter the path of a tornado, or cause one to happen in the
first place.

Social media is the “butterfly” of modern times. For new products or start-ups,
doing small things in social channels can lead to accelerated growth further
down the line. For a product or service to become the thing you talk about
tomorrow, it is key to reach out and engage in a conversation with the relevant
communities rather than publish monologues to drive sales or sign-ups. Be
present where the influencers and early adopters are, answer questions in
real-time, request feedback, show agility and iterate the product.

We noticed this “butterfly” effect recently with appear.in so today I will try
to explain how many small steps can lead to the big break.

## The "Korben" effect
[appear.in](https://appear.in) is a relatively new videoconference service in
the Telenor Digital portfolio, which since its small beginnings as a 2013
summer intern project has grown to be used in over 175 countries. We are proud
to have recently broken the top 100 000 websites in the world. And the best
part? The product has not spent any money on marketing, relying only on organic
growth and social spread. So how is this possible?

A butterfly effect in social media can be anything; a small tweet or an image
that is retweeted, shared, liked and spread to millions within just a few
hours. These 140 characters messages can have world-changing repercussions -
just think how one small tweet started the Arab Spring. For appear.in, it all
started on the 18 October with a
[tweet](https://twitter.com/appear_in/status/391202202032689152) about how
Opera launched support for appear.in in their browser.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>We &lt;3 <a href="https://twitter.com/opera">@opera</a>! appear.in now works in Opera Next. Talk to your friends with video - no login, no installs. <a href="https://twitter.com/search?q=%23webRTC&amp;src=hash">#webRTC</a> <a href="http://t.co/DYofTxKSam">pic.twitter.com/DYofTxKSam</a></p>&mdash; appear.in (@appear_in) <a href="https://twitter.com/appear_in/statuses/391202202032689152">October 18, 2013</a></blockquote>

Opera’s social media team picked up on the mention, [tweeted
back](https://twitter.com/opera/status/391203631963197441), and a friendly
dialogue developed. This resulted in the appear.in team getting an invite to
speak at an internal tech talk at Opera and our service was showcased in their
[latest browser
release](http://my.opera.com/ODIN/blog/opera-desktop-18-released).

The first large effect of this particular butterfly’s wings came from a French
blogger named “Korben”. He picked up appear.in from the new Opera release and
wrote a [great
review](http://korben.info/service-en-ligne-visio-conference.html) of appear.in
after testing it. This gave appear.in the largest boost in users to date, with
an increase in daily users by 1800% (no, I did not write too many zeroes!). The
team got in touch with Korben and the new users through feedback emails and
social media, and the numbers, although not as high as the day of the blog
post, remained high.

The Korben article was also a butterfly effect in itself. Being a prominent
tech blogger in his country, a number of smaller blogs picked it up and wrote
similar reviews. These got picked up by other users, who tweeted, shared and
became ambassadors spreading the product further and generating positive
growth:

![Growth spike for appear.in](/assets/img/posts/butterfly/graph.png)

Meanwhile the team worked tirelessly on improving the service, talking to
users, and [blogged](http://blog.appear.in/). Every tweet to appear.in got a
response - day and night - and where possible, [we tried to meet people in
their own language](https://twitter.com/appear_in/status/434349951616049152).
Users seemed to appreciate our efforts. Our tone and approach was honest and
humble - we admitted mistakes - and tried our best to solve the problems and
requests our users had.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>We &lt;3 Japan! たくさんの新しいユーザーに会えて嬉しいです！</p>&mdash; appear.in (@appear_in) <a href="https://twitter.com/appear_in/statuses/434349951616049152">February 14, 2014</a></blockquote>

## Community dialogue
But the big break, and the wave the product is currently riding from the
“butterfly”, came once again from Opera. On December 13th, they tweeted what I
would call the [perfect marketing
pitch](https://twitter.com/opera/status/411501391186624513) about appear.in to
their 289 000 followers. More users tried our service but the volume was
nowhere near Korben-levels.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>Tried <a href="http://t.co/nUPuDCOJGJ">http://t.co/nUPuDCOJGJ</a> for video conferencing yet? Works on Opera! It&#39;s free - no registration and no login. Awesome job <a href="https://twitter.com/appear_in">@appear_in</a>!</p>&mdash; Opera (@opera) <a href="https://twitter.com/opera/statuses/411501391186624513">December 13, 2013</a></blockquote>

However, this tweet set off a chain of events that would lead to where we are
today. On 1st February, a man in Bangladesh, who follows Opera and saw the
tweet, posted it on one of the biggest startup incubator sites in the world,
[HackerNews](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=7161207). It turns out our
new friend in Bangladesh had used appear.in for his team’s daily meetings with
colleagues in different locations.

Appear.in got posted on HackerNews one early Saturday morning Oslo-time, and
hit the front page within the hour. The post sent a huge amount of users our
way, surpassing even the “Korben peak” from November. The response was massive,
and the team immediately took to the feedback mail and comment section to
answer every user request and question. Every answer posted to HackerNews by
appear.in was prefixed with “Developer @ appear.in here”, giving the personal
touch, but at the same time staying honest to the reader about our natural
bias. The post about appear.in stayed on the front page of HackerNews for 14
hours, which made it visible to users from all time-zones; traffic came from
Asia, Europe and the US. For the entire time, the team took turns being active
in social media, answering questions and reaching out.

## Ripple effect
Other big news outlets started picking us up. Smashing Magazine, one of the
world’s leading web design magazines,
[tweeted](https://twitter.com/smashingmag/status/429581680123584512) about us
to their 750 000 followers. A computer science journalist wrote about us on
[makeuseof.com](http://www.makeuseof.com/tag/move-google-plus-hangouts-appear-really-good),
a top ten thousand web page in the entire world. Lifehacker.jp, a large
Japanese technology blog picked up on the makeuseof.com article and wrote a
[great review](http://www.lifehacker.jp/2014/02/140213google_appears.html).
This earned appear.in a solid foothold in the very hard market of Japan and put
us amongst the top ten thousand websites in the country. All of this happened
in the span of a week.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" lang="en"><p>Handy: free video conversations with up to 8 people, without any login nor installs. <a href="https://t.co/5VULgis6CN">https://t.co/5VULgis6CN</a></p>&mdash; Smashing Magazine (@smashingmag) <a href="https://twitter.com/smashingmag/statuses/429581680123584512">February 1, 2014</a></blockquote>

So, if we stretch it, that one small tweet to Opera set in motion a chain of
events that lead to the success that the product has today. But, in reality, it
wasn’t just that one tweet. It doesn’t take just the flap of a butterfly’s
wings to create a tornado. You need thousands of small things leading up to the
big change. For appear.in, the approach has been to be honest, actively engage
with our audience and follow up leads, no matter how small. It has taken a lot
of work getting to this point but we believe that the dialogue we’ve had with
our users has created ambassadors all around the world, giving appear.in a net
positive growth through social spread. And that is worth a lot more than any
paid marketing campaign we could have done.
