---
layout: post
author: dagingaa
title: User Experience is king in the WebRTC world
category: WebRTC
---
Yesterday I held a talk at the
[WebRTCExpo](http://www.webrtcworld.com/conference/east/) in Atlanta, Georgia.
The talk, which featured Ian Small, Dean Bubley and me, was called "Service
Provider Views on WebRTC". I was representing appear.in and Telenor to provide
what a typical Telco thinks about WebRTC and the future of communications. I
took a bit more of an original approach, and this blog post is an attempt to
write down these thoughts in a somewhat coherent manner, and present my point
of view on what the future of communications is.

After working on appear.in for almost a year, seeing the product grow from an
experiment into a mass-market product, I have learned quite a few things along
the way.

I think the most profound learning I have gotten is the fact that users don't
really care about WebRTC. In fact, they don't care about the technology at all,
all the cool stuff that us engineers think is awesome. Instead, users care about
simplicity, ease of use, in other words, they care about the user experience. If
the product is not simple to use, beautiful in its design, then users are not
gonna stay, they are not gonna spread your product.

However, that does not mean that WebRTC in itself is meaningless. In fact, I
think WebRTC is one of the most profound things that has happened to the
communication space in a very long time. And the reason for that is that WebRTC
allows developers to focus on creating good, innovative user experiences,
instead of worrying about the technology. WebRTC is so simple and developer
friendly that anyone is now empowered to create communication services. In
addition, WebRTC is extremely cost efficient. [appear.in](https://appear.in)
costs around $300 a month to run, and we have deployed TURN servers in 5
different regions. That's a cost that we expect to rise as we reach an even
wider market, but it's still many orders of magnitude cheaper than even the
simplest telecom infrastructure. This enables even developers in poor countries,
or single-person initiatives to prototype, deploy and watch their applications
grow for something that I could pay out of my own salary. That's significant!

####Asynchronous vs. Synchronous communication
I view communication as a forward-moving pendulum between asynchronous and
synchronous communication. Synchronous communication means that you can only
participate in communication in one context at the same time, it takes a lot of
attention. Examples of synchronous communication forms are phone, video calling
etc. Asynchronous communication means that you can answer whenever it suits you,
and you can often participate in many different contexts at the same time,
mostly because the communication is not real time. Examples of this is
messaging, email, image sharing etc. Twitter, Instagram and Facebook are
examples of broadcast asynchronous communication, and Snapchat, Whatsapp and
Line are examples of typical one-to-one or small groups.

Right now, the world is very much skewed towards asynchronous communication. We
have a need to broadcast our thoughts to others, to reciprocate, to talk to
others, but we don't have the attention span to have long synchronous
conversations with someone. It just takes too much time, and we don't have the
patience for that anymore. However, at the same time, we also need human
contact, we need body language, subtle cues, to see someone's eyes light up
when they see your face. Asynchronous communication does not deliver that same
form of real time human emotion that we need. In addition, the world is getting
more sparse. I have friends living all over the world, and we are now more than
ever able to keep in touch, and we need to keep in touch, to preserve those
dear friendships regardless of the distance that we are from each other.

Therefore, I believe that the world is currently shifting back towards
synchronous communication, but it's going to happen in ways that we cannot
currently predict. Snapchat is the first mover in that direction with Snapchat
Video. For the uninitiated, it works when both users are in the same chat
together, a little blue orb lights up. If you click and hold that blue orb, your
video will within a second appear on the other person's screen. This entices the
other party to also hold their blue orb, in practice "accepting the call", but
that's not what really happens. It's not a call, it's a one-way communication, a
moment shared, which is then turned into a two-way communication. And if you
haven't tried it, I highly recommend that you do, because it is truly a profound
and emotional experience, seeing that other person light up when they see you,
see their smile, the glow in their eyes. You then realise what you're missing
out on when you just send text messages or images, that feeling of human contact.

<iframe width="853" height="480" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/Z9h30NcVy4E" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

It's these kinds of new user experiences that will shape and innovate the way we
communicate in the next five years. And I think a major part of it will become
making these user experiences and expectations about it being OK to hang up, to
have these short bursts of human emotion, to share the moments in real time with
those you love.

In short, I think WebRTC will spawn a wave of innovation in the communication
space, and I don't think we can even begin to fathom the new kinds of user
experiences that will pop up the next five years.
